created example of deferred processing with transactions (#4457)
pachyderm/pachyderm: examples/deferred_processing/README.md

# Deferred Processing and Transactions

This example, 
which uses a simple DAG based on our [OpenCV example](https://github.com/pachyderm/pachyderm/tree/master/examples/opencv), 
illustrates two Pachyderm usage patterns for fine-grain control over when pipelines trigger jobs.

[Deferred processing](https://docs.pachyderm.com/latest/how-tos/deferred_processing/) 
is a Pachyderm technique for controlling when data gets processed.
Deferred processing uses branches to prevent pipelines from triggering on every input commit.

[Transactions](https://docs.pachyderm.com/latest/how-tos/use-transactions-to-run-multiple-commands/) are a Pachyderm feature 
that allows you to batch match multiple operations at once,
such as committing data to two different repos, 
but only trigger a single job, 
so data from both repos gets processed together.

## Prerequisites

Before you begin, you need to have Pachyderm v1.9.8 or later installed on your computer or cloud platform. 
See [Deploy Pachyderm](https://docs.pachyderm.com/latest/deploy-manage/deploy/).

## Pipelines

The following diagram demonstrates the DAG that is used in this example.

> ![Example DAG](./example_dag.png)

Reviewer: The image is not loading for some reason. Maybe try just `![Example DAG](example_dag.png)`

Author: I can see it in the file preview area, but that change won't hurt.

# Deferred Processing and Transactions

> ## Introduction

Reviewer: Let's get rid of the "Introduction" title. The *Deferred Processing and Transactions* section is empty. And we want to avoid that. Alternatively, you could add a paragraph under it. But, IMO, just kill the Introduction title.

[Deferred processing](https://docs.pachyderm.com/latest/how-tos/deferred_processing/) 
is a Pachyderm technique for controlling when data gets processed.

> Transactions are Pachyderm feature for assuring data from different repos get processed together.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Transactions are a Pachyderm feature that ensures that data from different repos is processed together.
```

> This is an example which uses a simple DAG, 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This example illustrates how you can use deferred processing along with transactions.
```

> based on our opencv example, 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The example is based on our [OpenCV example](https://github.com/pachyderm/pachyderm/tree/master/examples/opencv) and uses a simple DAG.
```

> to illustrate using deferred processing along with transactions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> 

Reviewer: remove extra lines 12 and 13.

> 

Reviewer: ## Prerequisites 

Before you begin, you need to have the following components installed and configured:

- Pachyderm v1.9.8 or later installed on your platform of choice or locally. See [Deploy Pachyderm](link to the deployment section).
- anything else?

If it's just Pachyderm, then get rid of the list:
Before you begin, you need to have Pachyderm v1.9.8 or later installed on your computer or cloud platform. See [Deploy Pachyderm](link to the deployment section).

## Pipelines

> ![Example DAG](./example_dag.png)

Reviewer: Add some text before the image. For example:

The following diagram demonstrates the DAG that is used in this example.

> The DAG shown is a simple elaboration on the opencv example,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The DAG shown is a simple elaboration on the OpenCV example,
```

with pipeline and repo names chosen to avoid collisions with that example 
if installed in the same cluster.

> The functionality is, of course, different.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, the functionality is different.
```

Author: I was taught to never begin a sentence with "however", as it's only used to introduce another clause.  So I'll just rewrite this to remove the "of course".

> The `edges_dp` pipeline will do edge detection on images committed to `images_dp_1`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `edges_dp` pipeline performs edge detection on images committed to `images_dp_1`.
```

> `montage_dp` will create a montage out of images committed to `images_dp_2` and images in the master branch of `edges_dp`. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `montage_dp` pipeline creates a montage out of images committed to `images_dp_2` and images in the master branch of `edges_dp`. 
```

> This is so it's easy to verify the files being processed

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This configuration enables you to verify the files being processed
```

by visually inspecting the montage.

> The most significant change from opencv in this example is the pipeline spec for `edges_dp`,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The most significant change from the OpenCV example is the pipeline spec for `edges_dp`,
```

which has the `output_branch` attribute set to `dev`.

```json hl_lines="11"
{
    "pipeline": {
        "name": "edges_dp"
    },
    "input": {
        "pfs": {
            "glob": "/*",
            "repo": "images_dp_1"
        }
    },
    "output_branch": "dev",
    "transform": {
        "cmd": [ "python3", "/edges.py" ],
        "image": "pachyderm/opencv"
    }
}
```

> This means that this pipeline, 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Therefore, this pipeline puts the output in the `dev` branch
```

> instead of putting its output in the `master` branch,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
instead of putting it in the `master` branch.
```

> will put it in a branch called `dev`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> Since `montage_dp` is subscribed to the master branch of `edges_dp`,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Since `montage_dp` is subscribed to the master branch of `edges_dp`, jobs will not trigger when the edges pipeline outputs files to the `dev` branch. Instead, to trigger a montage job, 
```

we can simply create a `master` branch attached to any commit in `edges_dp` to trigger the pipeline.

## Example run-through

> 

Reviewer: Add some intro text. For example:

This section provides steps that you can run to test this example.

### Deferred Processing

You should have a Pachyderm cluster set up 
and access to it configured from your local computer

> prior to running this example.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
before you run this example.
```

1. Run the script `setup.sh` included in this repo.

>    It will perform the following steps for you:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   The script executes the following commands:
```

   
   ```sh
   pachctl create repo images_dp_1
   pachctl create repo images_dp_2
   pachctl create pipeline -f ./edges_dp.json 
   pachctl create pipeline -f ./montage_dp.json 
   pachctl put file images_dp_1@master -i ./images.txt
   pachctl put file images_dp_1@master -i ./images2.txt
   pachctl put file images_dp_2@master -i ./images3.txt
   pachctl create branch edges_dp@stable_1_0 --head dev^
   ```
   
2. Once the demo is loaded, 

>    look at the commits in `edges_dp`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   check the commits in `edges_dp`.
```

>    They should look something like this.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   You should see an output similar to this.
```

   
   ```sh
   $  pachctl list commit edges_dp
   REPO         BRANCH COMMIT                           FINISHED      SIZE PROGRESS DESCRIPTION
   edges_dp     dev    85ca689439b943978d273b311003d1bf 2 minutes ago 0B   -         
   edges_dp     dev    dc23aa4da6b94fefbebb6751c1c9b5a3 2 minutes ago 0B   -         
   ```
   

> 3. Remember that the `edges_dp` pipeline outputs to the `dev` branch.

Reviewer: This is not a step but an explanatory text, so remove the number but keep the indentation.

>    Since the `montage_dp` pipeline subscribes to the master branch,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   Since the `montage_dp` pipeline subscribes to the `master` branch,
```

>    it won't be triggered when `edges_dp` jobs complete,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   it will not be triggered when `edges_dp` jobs complete,
```

   since that output goes into the `dev` branch.

4. See that there are two commits in `edges_dp`,
   both in the `dev` branch that's the output for the pipeline.

   ```sh

>    $ pachctl list commit edges_dp

Reviewer 2: remove this code block. Repeat of above. Or remove above, doesnt matter.

   REPO         BRANCH COMMIT                           FINISHED      SIZE PROGRESS DESCRIPTION
   edges_dp     dev    85ca689439b943978d273b311003d1bf 2 minutes ago 0B   -         
   edges_dp     dev    dc23aa4da6b94fefbebb6751c1c9b5a3 2 minutes ago 0B   -         
   ```
    

> 5. We've also created a stable branch that points at that first commit,

Reviewer 2: IMO, this example should omit all the "stable" branch stuff. That's too specific to customer use case and isn't something that all users of deferred processing will necessarily want to do. It's also not strickly needed for this example so lets simplify things.

Reviewer 2: yeah on reading the rest, let's just get rid of stable in this example. Move master to `dev` things get triggered, wooohoo, then keep making dev commits, etc. The stable part overcomplicates things a bit. This might require minor edits to make the flow make sense, but should be pretty easy.

   with the `dev` branch at the most recent commit.

>    The `master` branch, of course, has no commits.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   The `master` branch does not have any commits.
```

>    Take note of the commit ids and match them to the ids above.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   Take note of the commit IDs and match them to the IDs above.
```

   
   ```sh
   $ pachctl list branch edges_dp
   BRANCH     HEAD                             
   stable_1_0 dc23aa4da6b94fefbebb6751c1c9b5a3 
   master     -                                
   dev        85ca689439b943978d273b311003d1bf 
   ```

> 6. If we look at the jobs for this DAG, 

Reviewer: Again, this is an explanatory text. Keep it under step 5 with the indentation, but start your step 6 with an action, such as: 6. View the list of jobs:

> 6. If we look at the jobs for this DAG, 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   If we look at the jobs for this DAG, 
```

>    we'll see that there are three jobs:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   we'll see that there are three jobs:
   
```

>    - one 0-datum job for `montage_dp` and 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   - 0-datum job for `montage_dp`
```

   - two jobs for `edges_dp` with the appropriate number of datums in each.
   

>    This is what we'd expect.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   This is what we expect.
```

>    There's no data in the master branch of `edges_dp`, 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   The master branch of `edges_dp` has no data,
```

   so an empty job was created in `montage_dp`
   when data was commited to `images_dp_2`
   because of its `cross` input.
   
   ```sh
   $ pachctl list job
   ID                               PIPELINE           STARTED        DURATION  RESTART PROGRESS  DL       UL STATE   
   7d6aa9bbe1484e2e9ac60a7f84147e1b montage_dp         12 minutes ago 1 second  0       0 + 0 / 0 0B       0B success 
   f7a7d71dd7e74a3f9c48d4b9d2897ba3 edges_dp           13 minutes ago 4 seconds 0       2 + 1 / 3 181.1KiB 0B success 
   f9c620d1a4cc421a9c3923b749e9e6ed edges_dp           13 minutes ago 3 seconds 0       1 + 0 / 1 57.27KiB 0B success 
   ```
   

> 7. Now we commit a file to `images_dp_1`. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
7. Commit a file to `images_dp_1`. 
```

   ```sh
   $ pachctl put file images_dp_1@master:1VqcWw9.jpg -f http://imgur.com/1VqcWw9.jpg
   ```

8. We can see that one job was triggered in `edges_dp`
   with the one datum we committed, above, processed
   and the three existing datums skipped.

>    We can also confirm that no job was triggered for `montage_dp`. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   Confirm that no job was triggered for `montage_dp`:
```

   ```sh
   $ pachctl list job
   ID                               PIPELINE           STARTED        DURATION  RESTART PROGRESS  DL       UL STATE   
   c5feebe5c6ae48e0adc4f5bd7be9a9ac edges_dp           11 seconds ago 3 seconds 0       1 + 3 / 4 175.1KiB 0B success 
   7d6aa9bbe1484e2e9ac60a7f84147e1b montage_dp         20 minutes ago 1 second  0       0 + 0 / 0 0B       0B success 
   f7a7d71dd7e74a3f9c48d4b9d2897ba3 edges_dp           20 minutes ago 4 seconds 0       2 + 1 / 3 181.1KiB 0B success 
   f9c620d1a4cc421a9c3923b749e9e6ed edges_dp           20 minutes ago 3 seconds 0       1 + 0 / 1 57.27KiB 0B success 
   ```

9. Now we want to trigger `montage_dp` on the stable set of data in our `stable_1_0` branch.

>    We can accomplish that by creating a `master` branch with `stable_1_0` as its head.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   We can accomplish that by creating a `master` branch with `stable_1_0` as its head:
```

   
   ```sh
   $ pachctl create branch edges_dp@master --head stable_1_0
   ```
   

> 10. Listing jobs will show that a job got triggered on `montage_dp`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
10. List jobs to confirm that a job was triggered on `montage_dp`:
```

    ```sh
    $ pachctl list job
    ID                               PIPELINE           STARTED            DURATION  RESTART PROGRESS  DL       UL       STATE   
    1a8d2fefc2ba450e9102ffd6b74e503d montage_dp         31 seconds ago     4 seconds 0       1 + 0 / 1 693.8KiB 673.6KiB success 
    c5feebe5c6ae48e0adc4f5bd7be9a9ac edges_dp           About a minute ago 3 seconds 0       1 + 3 / 4 175.1KiB 0B       success 
    7d6aa9bbe1484e2e9ac60a7f84147e1b montage_dp         21 minutes ago     1 second  0       0 + 0 / 0 0B       0B       success 
    f7a7d71dd7e74a3f9c48d4b9d2897ba3 edges_dp           21 minutes ago     4 seconds 0       2 + 1 / 3 181.1KiB 0B       success 
    f9c620d1a4cc421a9c3923b749e9e6ed edges_dp           21 minutes ago     3 seconds 0       1 + 0 / 1 57.27KiB 0B       success 
    ```

11. If we want to trigger another job in `montage_dp`,
    based on what's currently in the `dev` branch,

>     we simply update `master` to point at `dev`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    we simply update `master` to point at `dev`:
```

    
    ```sh
    $ pachctl create branch edges_dp@master --head dev
    $ pachctl list job
    ID                               PIPELINE           STARTED            DURATION  RESTART PROGRESS  DL       UL       STATE 
    4b05f2c0ddf14ab0a4ca8f4ee2d6d9ff montage_dp         About a minute ago 3 seconds 0       1 + 0 / 1 693.8KiB 673.6KiB success 
    1a8d2fefc2ba450e9102ffd6b74e503d montage_dp         3 minutes ago      4 seconds 0       1 + 0 / 1 693.8KiB 673.6KiB success 
    c5feebe5c6ae48e0adc4f5bd7be9a9ac edges_dp           3 minutes ago      3 seconds 0       1 + 3 / 4 175.1KiB 0B       success 
    7d6aa9bbe1484e2e9ac60a7f84147e1b montage_dp         24 minutes ago     1 second  0       0 + 0 / 0 0B       0B       success 
    f7a7d71dd7e74a3f9c48d4b9d2897ba3 edges_dp           24 minutes ago     4 seconds 0       2 + 1 / 3 181.1KiB 0B       success 
    f9c620d1a4cc421a9c3923b749e9e6ed edges_dp           24 minutes ago     3 seconds 0       1 + 0 / 1 57.27KiB 0B       success 
    ```

12. We won't cause another job to trigger on `montage_dp` if we commit more data to `images_dp_1`.

>     It will only trigger a job in `edges_dp`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    It will only trigger a job in `edges_dp`:
```

    ID                               PIPELINE           STARTED            DURATION  RESTART PROGRESS  DL       UL       STATE   
    96439afdaf8249be81773c89fc87b366 edges_dp           31 seconds ago     3 seconds 0       1 + 4 / 5 204KiB   0B       success 
    4b05f2c0ddf14ab0a4ca8f4ee2d6d9ff montage_dp         About a minute ago 3 seconds 0       1 + 0 / 1 693.8KiB 673.6KiB success 
    1a8d2fefc2ba450e9102ffd6b74e503d montage_dp         3 minutes ago      4 seconds 0       1 + 0 / 1 693.8KiB 673.6KiB success 
    c5feebe5c6ae48e0adc4f5bd7be9a9ac edges_dp           3 minutes ago      3 seconds 0       1 + 3 / 4 175.1KiB 0B       success 
    7d6aa9bbe1484e2e9ac60a7f84147e1b montage_dp         24 minutes ago     1 second  0       0 + 0 / 0 0B       0B       success 
    f7a7d71dd7e74a3f9c48d4b9d2897ba3 edges_dp           24 minutes ago     4 seconds 0       2 + 1 / 3 181.1KiB 0B       success 
    f9c620d1a4cc421a9c3923b749e9e6ed edges_dp           24 minutes ago     3 seconds 0       1 + 0 / 1 57.27KiB 0B       success 
    ```

13. We can create another "stable" branch called `stable_1_1`.
    
    ```sh
    $ pachctl create branch edges_dp@stable_1_1 --head master
    ```

> 14. We can move master to our old stable branch, `stable_1_0`,

Reviewer 2: once stable part removed -- this step can be removed completely IMO. We want to just focus on deferred processing and dont need to reintroduce ideas like skipped datums

    ID                               PIPELINE           STARTED            DURATION  RESTART PROGRESS  DL       UL       STATE   
    01bb8e400c054a18a5c2c691f0b5a65d montage_dp         11 seconds ago     2 seconds 0       0 + 1 / 1 0B       0B       success 
    96439afdaf8249be81773c89fc87b366 edges_dp           42 seconds ago     3 seconds 0       1 + 4 / 5 204KiB   0B       success 
    4b05f2c0ddf14ab0a4ca8f4ee2d6d9ff montage_dp         About a minute ago 3 seconds 0       1 + 0 / 1 693.8KiB 673.6KiB success 
    1a8d2fefc2ba450e9102ffd6b74e503d montage_dp         3 minutes ago      4 seconds 0       1 + 0 / 1 693.8KiB 673.6KiB success 
    c5feebe5c6ae48e0adc4f5bd7be9a9ac edges_dp           3 minutes ago      3 seconds 0       1 + 3 / 4 175.1KiB 0B       success 
    7d6aa9bbe1484e2e9ac60a7f84147e1b montage_dp         24 minutes ago     1 second  0       0 + 0 / 0 0B       0B       success 
    f7a7d71dd7e74a3f9c48d4b9d2897ba3 edges_dp           24 minutes ago     4 seconds 0       2 + 1 / 3 181.1KiB 0B       success 
    f9c620d1a4cc421a9c3923b749e9e6ed edges_dp           24 minutes ago     3 seconds 0       1 + 0 / 1 57.27KiB 0B       success 
    ```

### Transactions

> 

Reviewer: Need an intro text. For example, 

After you test deferred processing, you can explore how transactions work in combination with deferred processing.

> 15. If you want to run a particular set of data in `images_dp_2` 

Reviewer: This should be step #1. 
Let's try to avoid lists that are longer than 10 - 12 if possible.

    against a particular branch of `edges_dp`,
    you need to perform two operations
    - commit data to `images_dp_2` and

>     - point `edges_dp@master` to the branch of interest.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    - point `edges_dp@master` to the specific commit of interest.
```

>     This will result in two jobs being triggered.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    If you do not use a transaction, this will result in two jobs being triggered, one for the new commit and a second when we move `edges_dp@master` branch.
```

    - `images_dp_2@master` running against whatever is currently in `edges_dp@master`
    - `images_dp_2@master` running against whatever you set `edges_dp@master` to
    

>     Remember that in step 14 above, 

Reviewer 2: adjust accordingly to above changes

    7d6aa9bbe1484e2e9ac60a7f84147e1b montage_dp         25 minutes ago     1 second  0       0 + 0 / 0 0B       0B       success 
    f7a7d71dd7e74a3f9c48d4b9d2897ba3 edges_dp           25 minutes ago     4 seconds 0       2 + 1 / 3 181.1KiB 0B       success 
    f9c620d1a4cc421a9c3923b749e9e6ed edges_dp           25 minutes ago     3 seconds 0       1 + 0 / 1 57.27KiB 0B       success 
    ```
    
16. If you want to just have one job 
    where `images_dp_2@master` runs against whatever you set `edges_dp@master` to,
    you can use Pachyderm transactions.
    First step is to start a transaction.
    
    ```sh
    $ pachctl start transaction
    Started new transaction: 018b9e52-e483-4a0a-accd-cef2656f7b8c
    ```
    
17. Once the transaction is started,
    you start all commits and branch creations 
    within the scope of the transaction. 
    
    ```sh
    $ pachctl start commit  images_dp_2@master
    Added to transaction: 018b9e52-e483-4a0a-accd-cef2656f7b8c
    e6e68bd54b9049658fca31aa7e905fcd
    $ pachctl create branch edges_dp@master --head stable_1_1
    Added to transaction: 018b9e52-e483-4a0a-accd-cef2656f7b8c
    ```

> 18. Before you put any files in an repos, 

Reviewer 2: funky question:

What happens if after this transaction, the edges@master branch is moved again by someone else. Once the transaction commit finishes, presumably the job will run against whatever master is pointing to at that time, right? Or will it be against the specific commit that was `master` during the transaction?

Author: I'm going to run another test on this after I complete this PR, because that's a question that's out of the scope of this doc. :-)

> 18. Before you put any files in an repos, 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
18. Before you put any files in a repo, 
```

    you need to finish the transaction.

>     That will group all the commits and branches together,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    When you run `pachctl finish transaction`, Pachyderm groups all the commits and branches together,
```

    1c8d2bb48bca451ba43fdc5308a24d6d montage_dp         About a minute ago 4 seconds 0       1 + 0 / 1 770.7KiB 906.7KiB success 
    01bb8e400c054a18a5c2c691f0b5a65d montage_dp         About a minute ago 2 seconds 0       0 + 1 / 1 0B       0B       success 
    96439afdaf8249be81773c89fc87b366 edges_dp           About a minute ago 3 seconds 0       1 + 4 / 5 204KiB   0B       success 
    4b05f2c0ddf14ab0a4ca8f4ee2d6d9ff montage_dp         3 minutes ago      3 seconds 0       1 + 0 / 1 693.8KiB 673.6KiB success 
    1a8d2fefc2ba450e9102ffd6b74e503d montage_dp         4 minutes ago      4 seconds 0       1 + 0 / 1 693.8KiB 673.6KiB success 
    c5feebe5c6ae48e0adc4f5bd7be9a9ac edges_dp           4 minutes ago      3 seconds 0       1 + 3 / 4 175.1KiB 0B       success 
    7d6aa9bbe1484e2e9ac60a7f84147e1b montage_dp         25 minutes ago     1 second  0       0 + 0 / 0 0B       0B       success 
    f7a7d71dd7e74a3f9c48d4b9d2897ba3 edges_dp           25 minutes ago     4 seconds 0       2 + 1 / 3 181.1KiB 0B       success 
    f9c620d1a4cc421a9c3923b749e9e6ed edges_dp           25 minutes ago     3 seconds 0       1 + 0 / 1 57.27KiB 0B       success 
    ```

> 20. Finishing the transaction by finishing the commit starts the job.

Reviewer 2: this isn't " finishing the transaction". 
```suggestion
20.   Finishing the commit that we started during the transaction finally starts the job.
```
